Course two Module 2 converting binary
numbers to hexi decimal numbers.
Hexadecimal again is a base 16 numbering.
System numbers and letters are used
to represent zero through 15.
Zero through nine are just the digits
zero through nine, 10 through 15.
The numeric values of 10 through 15
are represented as the letters A to F.
Hexadecimal is used as an easier to
understand representation of binary data.
What that means is our tools are not
going to show us a binary representation
of the data because it would
just be too much to look at.
That's why we use hexdecimal
because it is more compact and
much easier to interpret and view.
But remember,
data is not stored on disk in hex.
It is stored in binary and
again, that's either a wonder.
Zero, a positive or
negative charge on the disk itself.
Your forensic tools will perform
the conversion to hex for
you to convert by an area to hex.
The first thing we want to do is we want
to split the bite into two nibbles and
we talked about bites and
nipples in our last section.
A bite being an eight bit value and
a nibble being Half a bite,
a four bit value.
So we would go ahead and
in this case in our example we
have the hexdecimal number five f.
So we're going to split that,
the left and right nipple.
The left nipple would be the five and
the right nibble would be the f.
going to take our columns and
we're going to re
weight them Instead of having 1,248,
16 32 64 and 1 28.
We're going to have columns
numbered 1248 And 1248.
We'll start with the F.
We know the numeric value of F is 15.
So we're going to go ahead and
put a one in the eight column,
one in the four column and
a one in the two columns and a one.
The one call the numeric
value of five is five.
So we would have a zero
in the eight column,
a one in the four column 80 in the to
column and a one in the ones column.
And that is how we would convert our
hex a decibel number to decimate.
We would now have to go ahead and
re wait the columns for
each nibble back to
their original numbers,
which again would be 1,2,4,8,
16,32, 64, 128.
Here we can see our columns are related.
We have R one R two or four or
eight or 16 32 60 four and 1 28.
We would again go through
the same process we
did before adding all
these numbers together,
I would add the 64 to 16 plus
eight plus four plus two plus
1 which would convert our hexidecimal
value back into a decimal Value of 95.
Of note is the least significant bit
is the bit furthest to the right and
that would be the ones column in this case
and the most significant bit is always
going to be the bit Further to the left
and in this case that is the 1/28 column.
That will become more important
as we move through the course.
So you can see we have the number 95.
We split our two nibbles.
We would drop our values down into our
re rated re weighted columns 84-1.
We would have all ones there that
would give us a total of 15 And
15 in Hexi decimal is F.
And then we would look to our left
nipple and we have our columns
of 1248 again we would add our
column values that have ones
in them together which would be the four
And the one and we would get a five.
So hexi decimal five f.
is decimal 95.
Now we're going to take a quick look
at a decimal value of two bites.
And another way to convert it.
We talked about decimal hex
to decimal being A Base
16 Numbering System With a column of 016,
256 and then 4096.
And how this works is the column furthest
to the right is 16 to the zero power.
Next would be 16 to
the one Which would be 16,
16 to the to which would be 256 and
16 to 3rd Which would be 4,096.
Now we would take our bites and
put them in the columns to A and three B.
Three B.
Being the columns on the left to A.
Being the columns to the right.
We would multiply three times 4000
96 Come up with 12,288.
Next we have our hex value
of B which we know is 11.
So we would multiply 11 times 256 and
we would get the number of 2816.
Next we Would go to our
16's column 16 to the first
power where we have a value of two for
the two first two and to a.
We would multiply 16 times two and
come up with 32.
Now we would go to our column furthest to
the right which would be our value of A.
And we know A in hexidecimal
decimal number of 10 so
16 to the zero power is zero.
So we would just have 10.
Now we would take all of our numbers and
add them together.
So that is 12 288 plus 2816.
For a three A to B for our three B.
Excuse me then we would add 32 plus 10 For
our two a.
And we would have a total of 15 146.
So the two byte value,
which would be a word,
two bites of hexi decimal
three B to A is 15,100 and 46.
In your path folder there
are worksheets with
hexdecimal two decimal values
that you can convert and
also binary values that you can
convert from decimal to binary.
There's also an answer sheet in there with
the examples so you can do some practice
and make sure you've grasped the concept
before you move on to the next course.
In our next block, we're going to talk
about negative numbers, how we get
a negative number and that's going to
involve something called a signed integer.